It has been said that money is the root of all evil.
While this may not be entirely so, the mental and emotional
enslavement that we experience around the subject is
certainly the cause of a great deal of suffering.
How did we become so engrossed in the system of money,
which is a relatively new concept in human history?
Tom Greco and I had a wonderful discussion about money,
it's history, and our future beyond money.
Tom, if you could explain how you ended up really
focusing in some of these much needed and
very intriguing areas of the economy, or the new,
hopefully emerging, types of economies.
I would like to hear that.
Well the whole thing started because of my interest
and concern about social justice.
Several years ago, I started to look into this.
What were the root causes of the world's problems?
Why did we have starvation in the midst of plenty?
Why do we have recurring wars?
What can we do to stop all of that?
I very quickly got channeled into the realm of economics,
because I saw the tremendous inequities that exist.
I started to take a look at why do these inequities exist.
And I quickly realized, that we have a money system
that is inherently flawed.
There's several problems with the money system.
Primarily, I discovered that the way money is created,
creates an impossible situation.
Money today is nothing but credit,
and it's credit that's allocated by the banking system
in the form of loans.
Of course, the bank charges interest on every loan.
So the thing about interest is that it causes
debt to increase simply with the passage of time.
That's the compound interest function.
If you borrow 100 dollars today, you will owe
maybe 110 dollars a year from now.
And two years from now, it'll be a 121 dollars
cause you have to pay interest on the accumulated interest.
So, we've seen this continual build up of debt
in the economy, this isn't just theoretical, this is actual.
In recent years, we're seeing it escalate
in huge proportions.
We're seeing how the total debt just over the last 30 years
has climbed to astronomical proportions in
comparison to what it was just three decades ago.
The federal government debt also,
this is one major sector that is showing tremendous
explosion of debt.
The U.S. government debt, now, stands at around
11.7 trillion dollars.
That's just the federal government debt.
There's no way that this debt is ever going to be repaid.
The government simply, when the bonds come due,
it repays those bonds but it issues replacement bonds
and then some additional to cover it's current deficits.
What I discovered is we have, in this monetary system,
we have a growth imperative because of the debt imperative.
When debt grows exponentially with the passage of time,
it forces everything else to try to grow in order to..
To sustain it.
You're right, in order to sustain the system,
in order for the debts to be managed.
But, it's an impossible situation, sort of like the game
of musical chairs, except instead of taking away chairs,
we're adding more people.
So, more and more people are having to bear
more and more debt.
Eventually, we reach a point where it's impossible
to be born.
The system must create additional debt
year after year after year.
It can either lend into the private sector,
or it can lend into the public sector, the government.
What we saw in this most recent cycle in the bubble and bust
phenomenon, that's an artifact of this monetary system,
we saw banks lending on the basis of real estate.
And they were lending without adequate regard to
the borrowers ability to repay.
So, by making credit easily available to purchase
real estate, you had more people entering the real estate
market buying residential real estate, buying commercial
real estate, buying second homes as an investment.
People began to see the prices of real estate escalate,
because there were more buyers in the market
with money from the banks ready to be paid.
So, you had this escalation in market prices of real estate
which justified even larger mortgage loans to be made
the next time it was sold.
Of course, eventually, the bubble reaches the point where
you've loaned to everybody who's available to lend to
and those that you loaned to originally having inadequate
incomes to service those loans are beginning to default
so the bubble collapses, more real estate is thrown on
the market, prices begin to decline, and you have a lot of
uncollectible debt that needs to be written off.
Now, what the government has done, this became
such a severe problem in September of 2008,
that the whole global system of money and finance
was on the verge of collapse.
In order to keep it from collapsing, the government
asked congress for the power
to borrow and to bail
out the banks, and so we've had this shift.
This private debt that was on the books at the private bank,
has been taken over now by the government public sector.
As I said earlier, the debt either has to be expanded into
the private sector or it has to be expanded
into the public sector, but it has to be expanded.
Eventually, it ends up in the public sector because the
public sector is the most able to bear it.
But what you have now is an arrangement, and this gone on
for the last 300 years.
You have an arrangement between politics and finance
whereby governments can spend beyond their tax revenues.
In return, the banking cartel gets the privilege of lending
money into circulation at interest.
So we have, as I call it, two parasitic elements within
the economy that are attached to this global system
of money and banking.
You have the interest that everyone has to pay in order
to bring money into circulation, and you have the inflation
that's caused by the monetization of government debt.
And that monetization is gonna increase more and more
as time goes on.
What happens when you monetize the government debt,
is you basically put empty dollars, legalized counterfeit
into the economy.
Which is happening at lightening speed
as we speak.
Right, without putting additional goods and services
into the economy, so the ultimate effect is going to be
hyper inflation, the reduction of the purchasing power
of the money.
And we've seen this happen over and over again
in cases like the Weimar Republic of Germany after the
first world war.
They expanded the money supply to such enormous
proportions that they were issuing
notes in denominations of 500 million marks
or billion marks, two billion marks...
I saw one recently framed in a household
it was of a few million in denomination, yes.
It's a classic example, and prices were increasing
so rapidly that people were asking to be paid twice a day
so that they could hand off the bundles of notes to
their relatives and friends so they could take them to
the shops and spend them before they lost further value.
So this is the kind of thing that we're looking at when we
have an inflation of the money supply through
monetization of the debt.
Is that a literal path you see, the
United States for example, going down now?
I do, right now that has not happened because
we also have a depression.
You see, the private productive sector is being starved
for credit while the public sector is being lavished
with credit to support the empire, to bail out the banks,
and to do all kinds of waste that government typically
does in giving favored clients
contracts to pursue the war
in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The military industrial complex is doing very well,
thank you.
You know, there getting all kinds of funding.
About the only ones that seem to be
getting funding still, the war effort.
And yet, the private productive sector, especially the
small and medium sized businesses, are being starved
for capitol.
So, you have bankruptcies happening, and you have
people being thrown out of work.
So in this sector, people are still scrambling to get
enough dollars to service their debts, to put food
on the table, and to pay the rent.
While in this other sector, you have credit being lavished,
and that sector is spending.
They're sucking value out of the economy, bidding the prices
of real goods and services up, and eventually that's going
to reach hyperinflationary levels.
So we're going to see a devasement of the dollar continue,
and we're going to see prices increase, especially
prices of imports.
The United States has been, for quite a long time, running
these twin deficits: the budget deficit and
the trade deficit.
The United States has been buying more from foreigners
than we've been selling to foreigners.
The foreigners have been using their dollar earnings
to buy U.S. government bonds and other securities
of U.S. corporations.
So the Chinese, for example, they have about one and a half
trillion dollars worth of dollar denominated investments,
including, I think, about 600 billion dollars worth of
U.S. government bonds.
They're getting kind of nervous, now, when they see that
the enormous monetization of government debt.
And they're looking at their enormous dollar holdings,
and worrying that they're not going to get value for those
dollar holdings.
What they're trying to do now is to limit their accumulation
of dollar denominated assets and diversify their
foreign exchange holdings.
So they've put us on notice, that they're not going to
accumulate dollars the way they have in the past.
But, you know, their economy has been largely dependent
on sales into the U.S. market,
and so they're sort of between a rock and a hard place.
Right.
The U.S. government officials have been complaining
about the Chinese currency being overvalued,
but I think this is a rather disingenuous complaint,
because you can't have it both ways.
Do we want them to buy up our debt or do we want
them to stop sending all their goods and services into
our market and providing us with cheap Chinese made goods
that are relatively high quality, by the way.
This whole system of global exchange and money in banking
I think has reached it's limits.
It cannot be sustained much longer.
We're going to have to reinvent money and banking from
the bottom up.
The way I see that being done is by going to
cashless exchange on a local community by community basis.
We can set up mutual credit clearing systems that provide
the direct clearing of purchases
and sales by the principles in the economy.
You've got buyers and sellers, first party, second party.
Typically, a seller will provide goods and services to a
buyer and a buyer will pay for those goods and services
using conventional money: dollars in the United States,
euros in the Euro zone.
Won, Yen.
Whatever.
So these are all political currencies, they're managed by
some central bank, and the central bank may or may not
be owned by the government.
In the United States, the central bank is the
Federal Reserve, it's a private company, and it's
independent to the government, and both
unresponsive and unaccountable.
Representative Grayson from Florida has been
holding their feet to the fire, trying to get them to
reveal their operations, so far without success.
Twice or three times I've heard that there
were deadlines for the audit to occur, yet it never occurs.
The fed has never been audited.
Representative Ron Paul from Texas has been calling for the
fed to be audited, and in fact, for the fed to be abolished,
I think a move which is long overdue.
But getting back to the local exchange systems,
instead of paying with conventional political money,
basically, businesses can pay with their own goods
and services.
It's goods and services that pay for other
goods and services, ultimately, any way.
Are we talking a barter system then or...
Well, it's typically regarded as barter, but barter
is one on one.
You have something I want, I have something you want,
we make a trade.
But when we have an association of multiple players,
it doesn't have to be direct, one to one barter.
So give us an idea of how that would play out
in a small community for example.
Well, I'll give you an example from the commercial
barter realm.
There are commercial companies that provide credit
clearing services to businesses, business to business
exchange, without the use of cash.
There are hundred of them around the world.
There's an association called the International Reciprocal
Trade Association, which is the trade association for this
industry, commercial barter business, properly called
commercial trade exchanges.
What they do is they recruit members to participate in the
circle of exchange.
They may have restaurants, they may have office
supply stores, they may have plumbers, electricians,
all kinds of professional services, and retail wholesale
establishments, and they do business with one another
on a non cash basis.
If I have a restaurant, when I sell a meal to a member,
I get a credit in my account.
I can then use that credit to buy office supplies, or
get plumbing services, or electrician services,
or anything else that's available within the association.
So, it's as simple as that.
Money is really just an accounting system.
The banks still pretend that it's something physical
and real, so that they can lend it to us at interest.
And the way that I describe the banking system currently,
I say that we give our credit to the banks, and then we ask
them to lend some of it back to us and we pay them
interest for the privilege.
Sometimes we beg them to loan it
back to us.
Absolutely, absolutely.
And they make credit scarce for the productive sector,
and they make it readily available to favored clients
and to the political
cohorts and the government sector.
We can reinvent money in banking from the bottom up
by creating these mutual credit clearing circles
in every community and then networking them together.
It's sort of similar to what has happened in the development
of computers.
You know, you have your laptop, I have my laptop,
so we have our own local computing system and our
own local databases on our hard drives, but we also
have been able in recent years to network our computers
together so that we can share files, and we can share
information over the internet, we can communicate
through the internet, and so we can transact business
from your computer to my computer so to speak.
Likewise, in these local credit clearing exchanges
we will be able, when we network them together, to
transact business across the exchange boundaries.
One person to another.
The settlement process will be taken care of by the
local exchanges behind the scenes.
Just as we have clearing process in banks.
If I have an account at bank A, and you have an account
at bank B, I can write you a check drawn on my account
at bank A, and you can take it to your bank, bank B, and
they will cash it.
Even though it's not their obligation.
Right.
But then they take care of that in the
bank clearing house.
You know, all the banks used to send runners to the
clearing house, every community had a clearing house.
And the banks at the end of each day, would send all
the checks to the clearing house, and they would tally
them all up.
They might have millions of dollars in checks that were
cashed and deposited into various individual accounts
and business accounts.
And then they would see that, okay, you got bank A owes
bank B five million dollars.
But bank B owes bank A 4.9 million dollars, so they settle
up with a transfer of 100 thousand, a small portion in
relation to the total amount of transactions that were done.
The same thing can be done in these mutual credit clearing
systems that are networked together.
One of the questions I have here is,
because the nature of our, the jobs that exist today versus
what existed 50 years ago, for example, has become so much
more virtual.
It almost seems like half the world are consultants of
some kind, much of it within the financial industry,
Right, personal service and such.
So what happens when you take people, for example,
that don't have a restaurant, and aren't electricians,
don't have these kinds of very necessary skill sets,
and they make up a large portion of this community,
how does this work?
Do we have to start reevaluating or recreating our
skill sets to be able to plug ourselves into this system?
Well that's an interesting point.
Look at what the United States exports today, you know,
our manufacturing has been basically dismantled, and we
are dependent on foreigners for all our manufacturing goods.
What we export now is weapons, financial services,
meaning debt...
Right, right, debt.
We teach people how to create debt, our banks are all over
the world, indebting the rest of the world, just the way
they've indebted us in the United States.
Let me add one thing about the local credit clearing
exchanges, these will be non interest credit exchanges.
It's very important to get beyond this growth imperative
that's caused by the compound interest formula.
Right.
On working capitol and short term credit.
So going back to the skill set issue, and
the U.S. for example, and must of the western world even.
Well, when you get down to an economy where people
are producing what we actually need, and we stop producing
a lot of junk and unnecessary stuff, weapons for example.
When the military expenditures are no longer needed,
then people will find ways to employ themselves more
productively.
We've solved the production problem.
The production problem used to be the primary problem
in centuries past, when people were starving it was because
they weren't growing enough food.
We don't have that problem anymore.
We grown more than enough food, even if we were to go
totally organic, we would be able to grow more than
enough food than is needed to support all of the
six and a half billion people in the world today.
The benefits of this productivity have not been adequately
distributed.
Right.
So we have extreme poverty in some sectors and
extreme affluence in other sectors.
A lot of people have to make their living by catering to
the super rich and providing luxury goods instead of
basic necessities of life.
All of this has been made possible because of the
exploitative nature of this imperial money and
finance system.
When we move more toward sustainable economy
we will be producing more of what people actually need
and less of what we don't need.
We produce a lot of disposable junk now.
We do, I mean this, I have another
question forming as a result of what you're saying,
and that is we have a rather limited spectrum of what we
consider necessities which is food, electricity, and a roof
over our heads.
But the human skill sets available on this planet are vast.
It seems to me that if you're really embracing the system
you're talking about, we would start placing value on things
that, at least in the west, have been devalued such as art.
A poet would have their offerings to the system, but these
things would actually start having value again within
societies, would they not?
Absolutely.
If the production of the world were adequately distributed,
people wouldn't have to spend so much of their time
dealing with the lower level needs.
You know, Maslow's hierarchy of needs.
You have the survival needs at the very base,
and then you go up from their with the self actualization.
If we were distributing our total global products properly,
we would only have to spend a very few hours each week
in work.
Exactly.
We would be able to spend our time doing things that
are much more enjoyable, much more creative, and
much more beneficial to ourselves and our communities.
And this is critical because people now
feel, college graduates, you're lucky to get a job in a
restaurant, right now.
It almost doesn't matter what your degree is in,
there are few areas that are still kind of hot.
Veterinary industry, I hear still needs some people,
but other than this, mostly, you're lucky to get a job in a
restaurant, just to be able to put food on your table.
And so, this is really critical because everybody in every
age group, especially the young ones coming out of college,
now, are starting to feel this lessening of possibilities
in this squeeze because they're working two jobs to pay
for their apartment and their food.
Two jobs, they're not necessarily even skilled at, but
have to do because it's all that's available.
This is becoming rather dire on a real human spirit level.
Yes, and it's sort of a self reinforcing cycle.
When you're driven to the lowest level of needs because
money is scarce, as it is for most of us,
then you're looking for the cheapest thing in the market.
So, companies provide that demand, you know,
instead of making things that are durable and going to last
50 or 100 years, they produce things that they can make
quickly, things that can be made cheaply, but they're
not going to last.
And you're going to have to replace them in a year or two.
So, we're driven more toward cheaper, more disposable
stuff, and what we need to do, it's because labor is
an expense to a corporation, and the higher the labor costs,
the lower the profits.
So, at the same time that they're trying to sell their
products, they're trying to reduce the costs of labor.
But, who the buyers for the products, it's the workers.
Henry Ford had that insight a long time ago,
and he had the best paid workers in the industry
because he knew that those were his customers,
they were the ones that we're going to buy his cars.
So, you know, as long as you can exploit labor here, and
sell to affluent people over there, you can sustain this.
Yeah, well you can sustain it for that culture
but not for the one that's being exploited and this is a
global problem there.
I'm just saying, here we're whining because our children,
college graduates can only get a job in a restaurant,
you're talking about huge masses of the population who
farm for industry and can't even feed their own children.
Now, that's at the most desperate end of this heirarchy
of values.
Exactly.
This has to be rebalanced too, and India's
making some headway.
But what I'm saying, is that we've been able to sustain
this dysfunctional system for so long because we've
been able to do that.
We exploit a market over here, and we sell into a
market over there.
Right.
Now that we have a global economy, and
the economies are being all tied into one, we can
no longer do that.
You know, we're seeing, we've reached the limits,
the game is up.
Even George Soros, he's saying that this is the end of
an era, this is not business as usual.
It's the end of an era.
The title of your book, "End of Money,
Beginning of Civilization", can you just talk about...
I love the title.
That might have been a better title, actually it's
"End of Money and The Future of CIvilization".
Although I like that beginning of civilization.
I like that too, I think that might be
even more appropriate.
Okay, so let's talk about that.
To call what we've had up to now, civilization, is
probably a stretch of it.
Yeah, misnomer, so let's talk about why
the title of your book, as it is?
This is really an important concept we're all going to have
to deal with.
Right, it's a question I often have asked, what do you
mean by the end of money?
Well two things, first of all, money has made a progression
in it's evolutionary process.
Money today isn't what it used to be yesterday.
And I'm not just talking about purchasing power,
I'm talking about the actual substance of money.
Going back, let's say 100 years or 200 years, money
was commodities.
It was some commonly useful or
commonly demanded commodity that could be passed
along in return for what you want.
Typically, gold and silver became the commodities of
choice for various reasons.
They were highly...
Easier to carry a little gold than a pig.
Right, right.
But we've had tobacco, and salt, and nails, and bullets,
and hides, these have all served as money in the past.
But gold and silver became the preferred commodities
that were used as money.
And at that time, the gold or the silver were actually
commodities that had value in themselves.
And then, banking began to develop and they created
symbolic money.
You would deposit your gold, they would give you basically
a warehouse receipt that said this represents gold
on deposit, and pay to the bearer on demand.
So that you could take this bank note and buy something
with it, and whoever accepted it could then take it to the
bank and redeem it for gold.
Like you say, this has been going on for about
300 years plus now.
Right, so we had commodity money then symbolic money.
But then, the banks created credit money.
And this was a major leap forward, this was a good thing
not a bad thing.
The bad part about it was that it made it very easy
for money to be manipulated and falsified.
So, initially, the banks would issue bank notes, not on
the basis of gold and silver on deposit, but on the basis
of some other good collateral that you might be able to
put up, like let's say the title to your farm or your home.
So now, this credit money created a more flexible supply
of money, because now you could take goods inventories
for example, and issue money on the basis of those
goods inventories.
So now, a manufacture could take an invoice,
a manufacturer selling goods to you, let's say a wholesaler
could take the invoice once you acknowledge that you
owe me the money, I could take that invoice to a bank and
say would you discount this note and give me money now
even though you have 30 days or 60 days to pay.
So this provided a medium of exchange that was needed
to circulate in the economy for those goods to be
bought from the market, once they appeared in the market.
So this was a good thing, but then banks began to
manipulate this process, they began to issue money
on the basis of no collateral or bad collateral,
monetizing government bonds for example.
And so, we had this potential for inflation.
The debasement of the currency and the defeat of
reciprocity, which is the intention of money to begin with.
But now, we have the process of direct credit clearing.
And when you think about what banks do, this is primarily
what banks do today, it's direct credit clearing.
Even though they like to pretend that money is still
something that they're giving us, and something that
deserves the payment of interest.
So this credit clearing process, the fourth step in the
evolutionary phase, is actually the end of money
as we've known it.
Because the process I described earlier, just a bookkeeping
process of debits and credits, we know longer need
political money, which is a third part credit instrument.
And that's the beginning or future
of civilization.
That's the future of civilization, because now,
it enables us to create an economy that is sustainable,
that is under community control, that is not dominated
by a few people who happen to be in charge of the
monetary system.
And as individuals in society, societies
around the planet that would like to see this kind of,
I mean as you speak of it, it almost sounds Utopian.
Of course there are going to be some major bumps
in working our way toward this, we have a period of
letting go to go through that could be very, very painful
for a lot of people.
We have to kind of look at that as just any part of
any kind of transitional process, but once we can start
looking at the other side and the potentials there,
it is almost Utopian that we can start relaxing and
having the security of knowing that our lives aren't just
living at the bottom of that pyramid of hierarchy of
values, that we can actually start investing in our
self actualization, as you say, at the top and
everything in between.
How do we begin right now?
What do we have to do as citizens of this planet, right now,
to start working our way in that direction?
We have to start at the community level.
We have to bring the whole community together,
including the main stream business sector, mainly the
small and medium sized businesses that provide 60 percent
of the jobs, actually it may be even more than that,
and most of the goods and services that we consume.
We have to bring our communities together, the local
government, local business community, the non profit
organizations, the social service organizations,
all of the things that constitute
the social capitol of a community.
We have to begin to build these economic entities
within our communities, starting with mutual credit clearing
systems to mediate the exchange function.
And as you say, there are already
organizations in place that we can look to as models
or plug into.
We have plenty of historical experience with these
systems.
Yes.
We've had the privilege of having some breathing
space over the last 30 or 40 years, with which to experiment
and to learn how to do these things.
But, there's a good example that goes all the way back to
The Great Depression 75 years ago, it's called the Wir Back.
That's W-I-R.
It started as the Wir Business Cooperative Circle.
And during the depression, there wasn't enough
conventional money in circulation so business was bieng
strapped and hog tied.
What the small and medium sized business in Switzerland did,
was they came together to figure out how can we continue to
do business even though we don't have money?
And they came up with this credit clearing approach.
Yes.
So that's been in operation now for 75 years, and it's
been successful and growing.
They're now doing about one and a third billion dollars
worth of business among sixers and so we can imulate
that process.
They've worked out pretty much all of the bugs,
not entirely, but most of them.
And we have the commercial credit clearing exchanges
that I mentioned earlier, that have been operating
successfully for several decades now.
We can look to them,
and learn from their experience and build on it.
And it seems like we also can take a little
time for reflection and look inside ourselves.
What do I have to offer my community?
If I come down to having to go into this type of
credit system, my efforts have to go into this
credit system, what do I have to offer of value
within my own community?
And start really looking at this in a new way.
Exactly, we're going through some difficult times
right now, and the key to success is the diversification
of skills and abilities.
Yes.
And so, I think we have to learn to do a lot of different
things, and to be in touch with what our community
needs and find a way to supply it.
Well, very refreshing, I couldn't agree more
and it'll be very interesting to see how we all start
co-creating this, however awkward it may be along
the way to get going and thank you for your decades
of work and reflection on this so you can bring us
this articulate message.
You're welcome, we should make sure that we have
fun in the process.
Yes, we should, absolutely, there's got
to be the fun factor.
Thank you so much, Tom.
You're welcome.
Because this subject is so at the core of our emotions
these days, we are going to be doing several more
interviews on the topic and all of the creative endeavors
to ween us off the credit system of banking that are
taking form as you watch this.
Meanwhile, you can go to Tom's website at
reinventingmoney.com to dig deeper into the subject
and also purchase a copy of his book "The End of Money".
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.